README.md, before:

# Terminator
Backup and system maintenance for Debian-based systems and MySQL style databases.    It logs everything and only emails when something goes wrong.

## Quicklinks
- [Features](#features)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Setup](#setup)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Emails](#emails-optional)
    - [Database Setup](#database-setup-optional)
    - [Remote Host Setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)
    - [SSH Keys](#ssh-keys-optional)
    - [Backup Options](#backup-options)
- [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Configuration File](#configuration-file)
    - [Programs Used](#programs-used)
    - [Backup Scheduling](#backup-scheduling)
    - [Backup Process](#backup-process)
- [Terminator.conf Options](#terminatorconf-options)
- [Restore](#restore)
    - [Database Restore](#database-restore)
    - [System Restore](#system-restore)
    - [Individual File Restore](#individual-file-restore)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)

# Features
- Automatic daily updates
- Daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly MySQL database backups
- Daily incremental backups with tar
- Easy install with `./setup` file
- Automatically sets up cron job for updates and backups

# Quick Start
1. Put *terminator* on server (/opt/)
2. Run `setup`
3. Fill out `terminator.conf`
4. Add public keys to external backup hosts
5. Sit back and relax

# Setup
## Installation
Installation is made super simple through the use of git/GitHub.  Simply follow these steps:

1. Acquire *terminator* from GitHub using one of the following methods:
    - git clone https://github.com/tikenn/terminator.git
    - [Latest Release](https://github.com/tikenn/terminator/releases)
2. Place in a director of your choice on the computer (`/opt` is recommended, but *terminator* will detect any install location through `setup`)
3. Run `./setup`
4. Fill out appropriate components of `terminator.conf`.  Details are below and anything not filled out will either not run ([databases](#database-setup) and [remote hosts](#remote-host-setup)) or simply revert to default

## Emails (optional)
The system will email regarding fatal errors and attach the log file for review if desired.

- In `terminator.conf`, add a comma-separated list (no spaces) of emails as the value of `mailto=`
- Run `./send_test_email` (most email servers will put this in spam, so simply mark the email as 'not spam')

## Database Setup (optional)
If a MySQL-compatible database is present on the system, this will allow it to be backed up appropriately without system backups missing database files that are open for writing during the procedure

- In `terminator.conf`, fill out the following variables
    - `local_host_backup_dir`: directory where database backups will be stored.  Defaults to $INSTALL_LOCATION/terminator/backups
    - `local_host_db_user`:  root user of MySQL-compatible database
    - `local_host_db_pass`:  root password of MySQL-compatible database

## Remote Host Setup (optional)
- `terminator.conf` allows for two remote hosts based on the principle of having an on-site and off-site backup
- In order to login to a remote host, `terminator` will require the following information per host in `terminator.conf`
    - IP Address or Domain name (`on_site_host_domain=` and `off_site_host_domain=`)
    - Port Number (`on_site_host_port=` and `off_site_host_port=`)
    - Host user (`on_site_host_user=` and `off_site_host_user=`)
    - SSH Key (`on_site_host_ssh_key=` and `off_site_host_ssh_key=`) - automatically fille out if requested in `./setup`
    - Directory for storing backups on remote host (`on_site_host_backup_dir=` and `off_site_host_backup_dir=`)
        - ***Important: backup directories must already be on the remote system with the proper permissions!***
- After filling out the appropriate sections of `terminator.conf`, `terminator` will stream backups to remote hosts directly at the scheduled backup times (see [backup scheduling](#backup-scheduling))
- Finally, place public SSH keys on remote servers (see [next section](#ssh-keys))

## SSH Keys (optional)
- The setup file (`./setup`) will create SSH Keys for remote hosts and set up `terminator.conf` with their location upon request (however, these can be set up manually if desired)
- `terminator` requires **unencrypted** SSH Keys to login to remote hosts
- Once created, `./setup` will automatically store the private key(s)' location
- Place the public key `*.pub` on the remote host in $HOME/.ssh/ and rename it to `authorized_hosts` ($HOME refers to the home directory of the backup user on the remote host; see [Remote Host Setup](#remote-host-setup))

## Backup Options
Terminator provides two methods of modifying the backup behavior.  Both of the options can be found `terminator.conf`
 - `remote_system_backup_only`
    - Defines whether a local copy of backup should be created during the backup process
    - Options are `yes` and `no`
    - Setting this option to `no` will cause `terminator` to only create remote backups (see [remote setup](#remote-host-setup-optional))
 - `system_backup_ignore_list`
    - Lists the location for `terminator` to ignore during a backup
    - Formatted as a bash array \[`("/absolute/path/to/location1" "/absolute/path/to/location2")`\]

# How it works
## Configuration File
 - The configuration file `terminator.conf` is automatically set up when running `./setup`
 - Answers to `./setup` questions are automatically stored there
 - Other values are set to default in `terminator` script
 - Database and remote backup host parameters need to be set in order to take advantage of them

## Programs Used
- Updates: `aptitude`
- Database backups:  `mysqldump`
- System backups:  `tar` and `split`

## Backup Scheduling
 - Setup file (`./setup`) requests schedule time for daily run and automatically sets up cron job

### Update Schedule
 - Updates and upgrades are run daily

### Database Backup Schedule
 - Automagic daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly database backup scheduling based on install date
 - Daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly rollover settings in `terminator.conf` determine how many database backups per each time frame to keep; older backups are deleted
 - Missed weekly, monthly, and yearly backups will occur at the next scheduled daily backup

### System Backup Schedule
 - System backups are incremental
 - Settings in `terminator.conf` allow for a *weekly*, *monthly*, or *yearly* level 0 backup (full system backup)
 - Incremental backups are made on a rotating weekly basis after a level 0 backup until the next level 0 (levels: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, ...)
 - Missed level 0 backups will be attempted on the next scheduled backup
 - Other levels that are missed will not cause data loss and are simply skipped ([restores](#system-restore) still take place in the same order)

### Remote Backup Schedule
- Remote backups for the database and system are controlled by the above scheduling options
- Scheduling for the remote and local backups are **not** controlled independently

## Backup Process
### Database Backup
- `mysqldump` backups up all databases and database settings (including users and passwords)
- `mysqldump` is run daily
- Snapshots are made at weekly, montly, and yearly time intervals (see [Backup Schedule: Database](#database-backup-schedule)) by copying the daily backup
- Remote database backups are streamed immediately to remote hosts setup in `terminator.conf` (see [remote host setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)) during the backup process

### System Backup
- `tar` is used to backup the entire system
- `split` is used to break up the backup file into approximately 1 GB files for easier transfer to remote backups
- Finally, backups are compressed with `gzip`
- Remote system backups are streamed immediately to remote hosts setup in `terminator.conf` (see [remote host setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)) during the backup process

# Terminator.conf Options
`backup_start`
- **Description**: install date (YYYY-MM-DD) that controls backup frequency settings
- **Options**: dates
- **Default Value**: N/A 

`daily_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number of daily database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 7

`local_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) for storing datbase and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: `$INSTALL_LOCATION/terminator/backups`

`local_host_db_user`
- **Description**: **_root_** user of local database
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`local_host_db_pass`
- **Description**: **_root_** password of local database
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`log_file_rollover`
- **Description**: number of log files to keep
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 20

`mailto`
- **Description**: the comma-separated list of emails for error notifications
- **Options**: emails
- **Default Value**: N/A

`monthly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number monthly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 12

`off_site_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) on off-site backup host to store database and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_domain`
- **Description**: network location (domain or IP address) of off-site backup host
- **Options**: IP Address or Domain
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_port`
- **Description**: SSH port for logging in to off-site backup host
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_ssh_key`
- **Description**: file (absolute path) containing SSH key used to login to off-site backup host
- **Options**: filenames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_user`
- **Description**: user name for logging in to off-site backup host
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) on on-site backup host to store database and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_domain`
- **Description**: network location (domain or IP address) of on-site backup host
- **Options**: IP Address or Domain
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_port`
- **Description**: SSH port for logging in to on-site backup host
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_ssh_key`
- **Description**: file (absolute path) containing SSH key used to login to on-site backup host
- **Options**: filenames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_user`
- **Description**: user name for logging in to on-site backup host
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`remote_system_backup_only`
- **Description**: determines whether backups should only be stored remotely without keeping a local copy
- **Options**: `yes` or `no`
- **Default Value**: `no` (keep local copy)

`system_backup_freq`
- **Description**: determines how often a level 0 backup (full system backup) should be made
- **Options**: `daily`, `weekly`, `monthly`, `yearly`
- **Default Value**: 

`system_backup_ignore_list`
- **Description**: bash array \[`("path/1" "path/2" "path/3")`\] of locations (absolute paths) system backup should ignore
- **Options**: absolute paths in bash array
- **Default Value**: N/A

`weekly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number weekly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 4

`yearly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number yearly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 5

# Restore
## Database Restore
Please note that this is a MySQL-specific protocol

1. Please choose the last snapshot level to restore (previous daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly snapshot)
2. Go to the chosen directory using the following command:

    `cd $INSTALL_LOCATION/backups/<<snapshot_directory>>`

3. Type in the following command:
    
    `mysql -u <<root_user>> -p < database_file_to_restore.sql`

## System Restore
1. Reinstall the same operating system on the same or new machine
2. Copy ALL files in $BACKUP_DIR/systemdump to the new machine ($BACKUP_DIR: backup directory set in `terminator.conf`)
3. For each of the backup levels, run the following command, starting with the lowest level and ending with the highest:
    
    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | sudo tar xzpvf - -C / --numeric-owner`

4. Run the following command if the directories `/proc`, `/sys`, `/mnt`, or `/media` don't exist after running the command in *3*:

    `mkdir /proc /sys /mnt /media`

5. If database restore is necessary, use the most recent file in $BACKUP_DIR/mysqldump with the following command:

    `mysql -u root -p --all-databases < backup.sql`

## Individual File Restore
1. To verify the existence of a file in a backup level, use the following command to list all files in a specific directory in a *.tar.gz file for a specific backup level (note that the leading "/" is removed from the path)

    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | tar tzvf - path/to/directory_or_file`
    
2. Once the file or directory is verified, use the following command to extract it

    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | tar xzpvf - path/to/directory_or_file`

# Dependencies
Terminator primarily uses standard Linux tools; however, email notifications requires installation of email software.  These are installed with `./setup`.  Also, remote backups use *rsync*, but this is assumed to be pre-installed on the system.
 - [mailutils](http://mailutils.org/)
 - [mutt](http://www.mutt.org/)

Commit message:

Boot partition restore instructions
Added details about fixing the mount point of the /boot partition through the '/etc/fstab' file.  This process is necessary if the file identifies the /boot partition through UUID because the new OS install before restoring a system changes this value.

README.md, after:

# Terminator
Backup and system maintenance for Debian-based systems and MySQL style databases.    It logs everything and only emails when something goes wrong.

## Quicklinks
- [Features](#features)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Setup](#setup)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Emails](#emails-optional)
    - [Database Setup](#database-setup-optional)
    - [Remote Host Setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)
    - [SSH Keys](#ssh-keys-optional)
    - [Backup Options](#backup-options)
- [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Configuration File](#configuration-file)
    - [Programs Used](#programs-used)
    - [Backup Scheduling](#backup-scheduling)
    - [Backup Process](#backup-process)
- [Terminator.conf Options](#terminatorconf-options)
- [Restore](#restore)
    - [Database Restore](#database-restore)
    - [System Restore](#system-restore)
    - [Individual File Restore](#individual-file-restore)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)

# Features
- Automatic daily updates
- Daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly MySQL database backups
- Daily incremental backups with tar
- Easy install with `./setup` file
- Automatically sets up cron job for updates and backups

# Quick Start
1. Put *terminator* on server (/opt/)
2. Run `setup`
3. Fill out `terminator.conf`
4. Add public keys to external backup hosts
5. Sit back and relax

# Setup
## Installation
Installation is made super simple through the use of git/GitHub.  Simply follow these steps:

1. Acquire *terminator* from GitHub using one of the following methods:
    - git clone https://github.com/tikenn/terminator.git
    - [Latest Release](https://github.com/tikenn/terminator/releases)
2. Place in a director of your choice on the computer (`/opt` is recommended, but *terminator* will detect any install location through `setup`)
3. Run `./setup`
4. Fill out appropriate components of `terminator.conf`.  Details are below and anything not filled out will either not run ([databases](#database-setup) and [remote hosts](#remote-host-setup)) or simply revert to default

## Emails (optional)
The system will email regarding fatal errors and attach the log file for review if desired.

- In `terminator.conf`, add a comma-separated list (no spaces) of emails as the value of `mailto=`
- Run `./send_test_email` (most email servers will put this in spam, so simply mark the email as 'not spam')

## Database Setup (optional)
If a MySQL-compatible database is present on the system, this will allow it to be backed up appropriately without system backups missing database files that are open for writing during the procedure

- In `terminator.conf`, fill out the following variables
    - `local_host_backup_dir`: directory where database backups will be stored.  Defaults to $INSTALL_LOCATION/terminator/backups
    - `local_host_db_user`:  root user of MySQL-compatible database
    - `local_host_db_pass`:  root password of MySQL-compatible database

## Remote Host Setup (optional)
- `terminator.conf` allows for two remote hosts based on the principle of having an on-site and off-site backup
- In order to login to a remote host, `terminator` will require the following information per host in `terminator.conf`
    - IP Address or Domain name (`on_site_host_domain=` and `off_site_host_domain=`)
    - Port Number (`on_site_host_port=` and `off_site_host_port=`)
    - Host user (`on_site_host_user=` and `off_site_host_user=`)
    - SSH Key (`on_site_host_ssh_key=` and `off_site_host_ssh_key=`) - automatically fille out if requested in `./setup`
    - Directory for storing backups on remote host (`on_site_host_backup_dir=` and `off_site_host_backup_dir=`)
        - ***Important: backup directories must already be on the remote system with the proper permissions!***
- After filling out the appropriate sections of `terminator.conf`, `terminator` will stream backups to remote hosts directly at the scheduled backup times (see [backup scheduling](#backup-scheduling))
- Finally, place public SSH keys on remote servers (see [next section](#ssh-keys))

## SSH Keys (optional)
- The setup file (`./setup`) will create SSH Keys for remote hosts and set up `terminator.conf` with their location upon request (however, these can be set up manually if desired)
- `terminator` requires **unencrypted** SSH Keys to login to remote hosts
- Once created, `./setup` will automatically store the private key(s)' location
- Place the public key `*.pub` on the remote host in $HOME/.ssh/ and rename it to `authorized_hosts` ($HOME refers to the home directory of the backup user on the remote host; see [Remote Host Setup](#remote-host-setup))

## Backup Options
Terminator provides two methods of modifying the backup behavior.  Both of the options can be found `terminator.conf`
 - `remote_system_backup_only`
    - Defines whether a local copy of backup should be created during the backup process
    - Options are `yes` and `no`
    - Setting this option to `no` will cause `terminator` to only create remote backups (see [remote setup](#remote-host-setup-optional))
 - `system_backup_ignore_list`
    - Lists the location for `terminator` to ignore during a backup
    - Formatted as a bash array \[`("/absolute/path/to/location1" "/absolute/path/to/location2")`\]

# How it works
## Configuration File
 - The configuration file `terminator.conf` is automatically set up when running `./setup`
 - Answers to `./setup` questions are automatically stored there
 - Other values are set to default in `terminator` script
 - Database and remote backup host parameters need to be set in order to take advantage of them

## Programs Used
- Updates: `aptitude`
- Database backups:  `mysqldump`
- System backups:  `tar` and `split`

## Backup Scheduling
 - Setup file (`./setup`) requests schedule time for daily run and automatically sets up cron job

### Update Schedule
 - Updates and upgrades are run daily

### Database Backup Schedule
 - Automagic daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly database backup scheduling based on install date
 - Daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly rollover settings in `terminator.conf` determine how many database backups per each time frame to keep; older backups are deleted
 - Missed weekly, monthly, and yearly backups will occur at the next scheduled daily backup

### System Backup Schedule
 - System backups are incremental
 - Settings in `terminator.conf` allow for a *weekly*, *monthly*, or *yearly* level 0 backup (full system backup)
 - Incremental backups are made on a rotating weekly basis after a level 0 backup until the next level 0 (levels: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, ...)
 - Missed level 0 backups will be attempted on the next scheduled backup
 - Other levels that are missed will not cause data loss and are simply skipped ([restores](#system-restore) still take place in the same order)

### Remote Backup Schedule
- Remote backups for the database and system are controlled by the above scheduling options
- Scheduling for the remote and local backups are **not** controlled independently

## Backup Process
### Database Backup
- `mysqldump` backups up all databases and database settings (including users and passwords)
- `mysqldump` is run daily
- Snapshots are made at weekly, montly, and yearly time intervals (see [Backup Schedule: Database](#database-backup-schedule)) by copying the daily backup
- Remote database backups are streamed immediately to remote hosts setup in `terminator.conf` (see [remote host setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)) during the backup process

### System Backup
- `tar` is used to backup the entire system
- `split` is used to break up the backup file into approximately 1 GB files for easier transfer to remote backups
- Finally, backups are compressed with `gzip`
- Remote system backups are streamed immediately to remote hosts setup in `terminator.conf` (see [remote host setup](#remote-host-setup-optional)) during the backup process

# Terminator.conf Options
`backup_start`
- **Description**: install date (YYYY-MM-DD) that controls backup frequency settings
- **Options**: dates
- **Default Value**: N/A 

`daily_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number of daily database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 7

`local_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) for storing datbase and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: `$INSTALL_LOCATION/terminator/backups`

`local_host_db_user`
- **Description**: **_root_** user of local database
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`local_host_db_pass`
- **Description**: **_root_** password of local database
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`log_file_rollover`
- **Description**: number of log files to keep
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 20

`mailto`
- **Description**: the comma-separated list of emails for error notifications
- **Options**: emails
- **Default Value**: N/A

`monthly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number monthly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 12

`off_site_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) on off-site backup host to store database and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_domain`
- **Description**: network location (domain or IP address) of off-site backup host
- **Options**: IP Address or Domain
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_port`
- **Description**: SSH port for logging in to off-site backup host
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_ssh_key`
- **Description**: file (absolute path) containing SSH key used to login to off-site backup host
- **Options**: filenames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`off_site_host_user`
- **Description**: user name for logging in to off-site backup host
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_backup_dir`
- **Description**: location (absolute path) on on-site backup host to store database and system backups
- **Options**: absolute pathnames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_domain`
- **Description**: network location (domain or IP address) of on-site backup host
- **Options**: IP Address or Domain
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_port`
- **Description**: SSH port for logging in to on-site backup host
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_ssh_key`
- **Description**: file (absolute path) containing SSH key used to login to on-site backup host
- **Options**: filenames
- **Default Value**: N/A

`on_site_host_user`
- **Description**: user name for logging in to on-site backup host
- **Options**: strings
- **Default Value**: N/A

`remote_system_backup_only`
- **Description**: determines whether backups should only be stored remotely without keeping a local copy
- **Options**: `yes` or `no`
- **Default Value**: `no` (keep local copy)

`system_backup_freq`
- **Description**: determines how often a level 0 backup (full system backup) should be made
- **Options**: `daily`, `weekly`, `monthly`, `yearly`
- **Default Value**: 

`system_backup_ignore_list`
- **Description**: bash array \[`("path/1" "path/2" "path/3")`\] of locations (absolute paths) system backup should ignore
- **Options**: absolute paths in bash array
- **Default Value**: N/A

`weekly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number weekly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 4

`yearly_db_backup_rollover`
- **Description**: number yearly database backups to keep on all backup hosts
- **Options**: integers
- **Default Value**: 5

# Restore
## Database Restore
Please note that this is a MySQL-specific protocol

1. Please choose the last snapshot level to restore (previous daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly snapshot)
2. Go to the chosen directory using the following command:

    `cd $INSTALL_LOCATION/backups/<<snapshot_directory>>`

3. Type in the following command:
    
    `mysql -u <<root_user>> -p < database_file_to_restore.sql`

## System Restore
1. Reinstall the same operating system on the same or new machine
2. Copy ALL files in $BACKUP_DIR/systemdump to the new machine ($BACKUP_DIR: backup directory set in `terminator.conf`)
3. For each of the backup levels, run the following command, starting with the lowest level and ending with the highest:
    
    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | sudo tar xzpvf - -C / --numeric-owner`

4. Run the following command if the directories `/proc`, `/sys`, `/mnt`, or `/media` don't exist after running the command in *3*:

    `mkdir /proc /sys /mnt /media`

5. (optional) Fixing the `/etc/fstab` file, a process that might be necessary if the operating system identifies the boot partition by UUID
    1. Reboot the system
    2. Run `sudo blkid` to identify the name and UUID of the boot partition (usually `/dev/sda1`)
    3. Open `/etc/fstab` and change the boot partition (typically identified through a comment above the appropriate line and normally an `ext2` file system on Ubuntu)

6. (optional) If database restore is necessary, use the most recent file in $BACKUP_DIR/mysqldump with the following command:

    `mysql -u root -p --all-databases < backup.sql`

## Individual File Restore
1. To verify the existence of a file in a backup level, use the following command to list all files in a specific directory in a *.tar.gz file for a specific backup level (note that the leading "/" is removed from the path)

    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | tar tzvf - path/to/directory_or_file`
    
2. Once the file or directory is verified, use the following command to extract it

    `sudo cat backup.tar.gz* | tar xzpvf - path/to/directory_or_file`

# Dependencies
Terminator primarily uses standard Linux tools; however, email notifications requires installation of email software.  These are installed with `./setup`.  Also, remote backups use *rsync*, but this is assumed to be pre-installed on the system.
 - [mailutils](http://mailutils.org/)
 - [mutt](http://www.mutt.org/)
